# Adding modules to C: proposal and implementation

*This is part of a series where I present my Masters research, in a format that is more approachable than the structured layout of a thesis.*

In the previous article, we discussed many features that we want in a C module implementation. However, any good engineer knows that there is limited time and resources to implement everything, so we need to prioritize deliverables to provide incremental value.

What is the "minimum viable product" for our module system? Handling cyclic modules is a key part of our algorithm, but name isolation can be deferred to an extension (it's basically just namespacing). Let's also assume we do not call into .c/.h files, and defer any optimizations until later. You may notice that this iteration of module system behaves like a "dynamic preprocessor." In fact, we will show that this approach can be directly represented using only .c/.h files.

In the next article, we will show how we can extend this approach to add the other features.

## Proposal

Our module system runs after the preprocessor and before symbol resolution. To be a module, `module <identifier>;` must be the first declaration. Then `import <identifier>;` must be before all symbol definitions. Note that only symbol definitions are allowed at top-level in modules, as all top-level symbols within a module are visible to each other (ie. no need to forward declare symbols). If it is used, `export` must be the first keyword of a symbol definition. Exports make symbols visible to importers.

To further simplify implementation, we also impose a number of restrictions on the language. For example, we disallow defining a struct and a global in the same statement (eg. `struct S { int i; } s;`) and we don't support defining multiple variables in the same statement (eg. `int a, b, *c;`). No nested structs either. Point is, every top-level statement defines exactly one symbol.

Before we get started, let's show an example to get a feel for the system:

```
// M.c
module M;
export struct S { int i; };

// M1.c
module M1;
import M;
import M2;
export const int value = 3;
export struct S1 { struct S s; S2 *s2; };
export inline int foo(int a) { return bar(a) + value; }

// M2.c
module M2;
import M1;
struct S2 { struct S1 s1[10]; };
export typedef struct S2 S2;
export inline int bar(int a) { return a&1 ? foo(a*2) : a; }
int foobar() { struct S2 s2; return s2.s1->s.i; }
```

### 3 logical stages

We break the module system into 3 logical stages: interface generation, scope resolution and dependency tracing. Each stage provides information that the next stage needs.

### Interface generation

This stage looks at *a module file in isolation* (ie. without looking at the modules it imports). The goal is to extract information such as the module name, import names and top-level symbol names (also whether they are a type name). With this information, subsequent stages will be able to link identifiers with their symbol definitions.

The challenge is that C's grammar is context-sensitive, so `A *b;` can be a variable definition or multiplication, depending on if `A` is a type name or not. You need the symbol table in order to resolve this ambiguity, but this will also affect the symbol table of importers. Cyclic modules allow `M1` to import `M2` while `M2` imports `M1`, so we'll get stuck if we try to parse these modules in order.

So we need the symbol table to parse the module file fully. To build the symbol table, we need links from names to definitions, and this stage is collecting top-level symbol names, without needing the symbol table itself.

Fortunately, expression statements are not allowed at top-level, so if we see `A *b;` at top-level, we know `A` must be a type name. In fact, because we won't support "implicit int return type" (reason: reduces readability and is easy to migrate away from), the first identifier of a top-level statement can be assumed to be a type name (excluding special names like `static_assert`).

What about other expressions? Initializer expressions or those in function bodies are delimited by semicolons or braces, so can be skipped. So we can extract the name as well as the start and end of a symbol definition, which is what we need at this stage.

Note that you could extract more information at this stage, such as struct fields or whether something is const. However, you can also wait until you have the full symbol table, then parse everything at that point.

### Scope resolution

This stage looks at *a module file and the modules it directly imports*. It combines the interfaces generated by the previous stage to create a symbol table.

Note that we could start parsing the module file in this stage, as we have the symbol table now. However, if all you know is that `x` is a variable, you still don't know if `x.a` is allowed. To resolve this, you have to examine symbol definitions, which may require looking at things you indirectly import. In the example above, the return expression of `int foobar()` in module `M2` needs to know the fields of `struct S` in module `M`, even though `M2` doesn't directly import `M`.

For organization, the job of this stage is to only handle direct imports. Indirect imports are handled in the next stage. As such, we can defer the actual parsing to that stage.

### Dependency tracing

This stage looks at *a module file and its direct imports, as well as any of its indirect imports that it needs*. It uses the symbol table generated by the previous stage to know where to go to analyze a symbol definition. This stage takes a module file and generates a .c file by recursively inserting symbol definitions (or declarations) before or after other symbol definitions (or declarations).

Note that this proposal does not deal with name isolation, so we don't need to handle renaming of identifiers (eg. `foobar` to `foobar@M2`). This means that we can get a duplicate symbol definition error if `foobar` from `M2` and `foobar` from `M3` are brought into the .c file, but this is also a problem in existing C codebases, so we aren't making the problem worse.

#### Types

Let's consider a struct definition, `struct T { struct TT tt; struct TTT *ttt; int a[10]; };`. We'll need the definition of `struct TT` above this. And if it turns out `struct TT` contains `struct T`, then we should emit an error because it has infinite size.

As for `struct TTT`, we put a declaration of it above `struct T`, which helps us avoid false cycles.

Other types like union types follow a similar logic to structs. What about typedefs, which don't have declaration forms? If we're using the typedef as a pointer, or the typedef is a pointer type itself, then we only need to provide declarations of any symbols used in the typedef itself (instead of definitions).

#### Variables and functions

Since C does not have overloading, lookups on the symbol table simply use the name, without needing to perform analysis on the types (we'll discuss overloading further in the next article). With the exception of the `num_elements` example above, as well as inline functions, we only need to provide declarations of variables and functions when we need it.

Variable and function declarations use type symbols, which follow a similar logic to struct definitions as described above: pointer types (ie. boxed types) only need declarations, while value types (ie. unboxed types) need definitions.

For inline functions, there is an additional requirement that somewhere in the generated .c file, we provide the function definition. One solution is to simply put the definition of the inline function where you would otherwise use a declaration. But what if you have mutually recursive inline functions? The second time you get to the inline function, you switch to providing just the declaration.

What about variable and function definitions? Using the symbol table, we can analyze the expressions within and determine what is necessary. For example, if we have `struct T t;` from the previous section and have an expression `t.ttt->x`, then we'll need to fetch the definition of `struct TTT` if we don't have it already.

## Relationship to header files

As shown in the dependency tracing stage, all we're doing is stitching together symbol declaration and definition strings, essentially verbatim, into a specific order that the C compiler can understand. What would this look like in the form of header files?

Let's demonstrate on the example described in the proposal:

```
// M.c
module M;
export struct S { int i; };

// M1.c
module M1;
import M;
import M2;
export const int value = 3;
export struct S1 { struct S s; S2 *s2; };
export inline int foo(int a) { return bar(a) + value; }

// M2.c
module M2;
import M1;
struct S2 { struct S1 s1[10]; };
export typedef struct S2 S2;
export inline int bar(int a) { return a&1 ? foo(a*2) : a; }
int foobar() { struct S2 s2; return s2.s1->s.i; }
```

We could convert this into:

```
// M.c
#include "M_struct_S_defn.h"

// M1.c
#include "M1_value_defn.h"
#include "M1_struct_S1_defn.h"
#include "M1_foo_defn.h"

// M2.c
#include "M2_struct_S2_defn.h"
#include "M2_S2_defn.h"
#include "M2_bar_defn.h"
#include "M2_foobar_defn.h"

// M_struct_S_decl.h
struct S;

// M_struct_S_defn.h
#pragma once
struct S { int i; };

// M1_value_decl.h
extern const int value;

// M1_value_defn.h
#pragma once
const int value = 3;

// M1_struct_S1_decl.h
struct S1;

// M1_struct_S1_defn.h
#pragma once
#include "M_S_defn.h"
#include "M2_S2_defn.h"
struct S1 { struct S s; struct S2 s2; };

// M1_foo_decl.h
#ifndef __M1_foo_defn__
  #define __M1_foo_noemit__
  #include "M1_foo_defn.h"
#else
  inline int foo(int a);
#endif

// M1_foo_defn.h
#ifndef __M1_foo_defn__
  #define __M1_foo_defn__
  #include "M2_bar_decl.h"
  #include "M2_value_decl.h"
  inline int foo(int a) { return bar(a) + value; }
  #ifndef __M1_foo_noemit__
    extern inline int foo(int a);
  #endif
#endif

// M2_struct_S2_decl.h
struct S2;

// M2_struct_S2_defn.h
#pragma once
#include "M1_struct_S1_defn.h"
#include "M1_value_defn.h"
struct S2 { struct S1 s1[10]; };

// M2_S2_decl.h
#include "M2_struct_S2_decl.h"
typedef struct S2 S2;

// M2_S2_defn.h
#pragma once
#include "M1_struct_S1_defn.h"
typedef struct S2 S2;

// M2_bar_decl.h
#ifndef __M2_bar_defn__
  #define __M2_bar_noemit__
  #include "M2_bar_defn.h"
#else
  inline int bar(int a);
#endif

// M2_bar_defn.h
#ifndef __M2_bar_defn__
  #define __M2_bar_defn__
  #include "M1_foo_decl.h"
  inline int bar(int a) { return a&1 ? foo(a*2) : a; }
  #ifndef __M2_bar_noemit__
    extern inline int bar(int a);
  #endif
#endif

// M2_foobar_decl.h
int foobar();

// M2_foobar_defn.h
#pragma once
#include "M2_S2_defn.h"
#include "M_struct_S_defn.h"
int foobar() { struct S2 s2; return s2.s1->s.i; }
```

If you look closely, you can see the patterns. Let's broadly go over the interesting bits in more detail.

Notice that definitions need header guards (`#pragma once`) in order to avoid duplicate definition errors. You could also add circular reference error checking by writing `#if defined(__defn_enter__ && !__defn_exit__)`, but we choose to keep the example simple. For declarations, header guards are optional, and I've chosen to omit them.

When variables and functions are used, we usually `#include` the declarations. The exception is for array expressions, where we need the definition. Constants are implicitly static, so we're safe from linkage errors here.

Inline functions perform special logic so we can `#include` the declarations, which will automatically handle providing the definitions. Additionally, there is some `__noemit__` logic because in C, defining an inline function doesn't automatically generate code (C++ implicitly uses weak linkage for inline functions, which automatically handles this detail).

An example of expression-based definition lookup happens when `foobar` also grabs the definition of `struct S`, due to the arrow operator dereferencing the pointer.

This isn't shown in the example, but if a function's return type is a value type, we provide the value type's definition. This is because a caller of `struct S foo();` is going to need the definition of `struct S` anyways. For simplicity, we'll also provide the definition of a parameter's type if it's a value type. Otherwise, delarations are sufficient for pointer types (if the caller ends up dereferencing the pointer, it's the same case as `foobar` grabbing the definition of `struct S`).

## Implementation

An implementation that implements a large subset of the features described in the proposal can be found [here](https://github.com/SaltOverflow/c-modules/tree/a388a42/prototype_2). The logic behind how it works is described in detail in the previous sections, so I'll focus instead on the quirks and ways in which it is slightly different.

The overarching problem is that just supporting C99 requires a huge number of grammar rules, so my implementation only supports a subset of functionality. Notably, declarator parsing (eg. dealing with stuff like `char *(*fp)(int, float *);`) isn't fully handled (use typedefs for that).

The other complex area of C is expression parsing. Here, I do a small trick: I read the expression as a stream of tokens instead of actually parsing it (I do the same with typedef statements). Identifiers are looked up in the symbol table, and we don't error if they don't exist (eg. `a.b.c` doesn't need `b` and `c` to be in the symbol table). This means we're not as strict with our scoping rules, but the key is that it doesn't reject valid programs, so it is still useful.

Unfortunately, our expression parsing technique means that we lose the ability for `foobar` to know to grab the definition of `struct S` (from the example in the proposal). To handle this, the implementation provides the type definition in the places where we would normally only give a type declaration. The exception is when we're avoiding false cycles in type definitions. In those cases, we put the definition afterwards (eg. `struct S; struct SS { struct S *s; }; struct S { struct SS ss; };`). This resolves the issue because types are always comprehensively defined.

Something surprising I found was that some of the more complex features had cleaner implementations when storing context in global state instead of passing information through function calls. It makes sense, since traversing an AST creates countless recursive calls. I suppose this is why Clang makes heavy use of the Sema object when parsing.

Eventually, we will need to parse declarators and expressions properly, which will obviate the need for these tricks. But as it stands, it is a quick way to get functionality out.

## To be continued

We have looked at a proposal that supports cyclic modules wihout name isolation, and have gone into detail about special cases and how we handle them. We show how this proposal has an analogous header file representation. And we look at an implementation that works for programs that satisfy the proposal.

While this proposal already has enough features to be of use to existing C codebases, there are use-cases where it is still lacking in functionality. In the next article, we will look at extensions to this proposal, which will make the module system even more powerful.
